---
date: 2023-08-21
tags:
  - ac
  - circuit
  - power
  - real-power
  - apparent-power
  - power-factor
---

# Apparent Power and Power Factor

The [average power](103c4ff6.md) (in terms of the [rms values](28b471d6.md)) is a product of two terms. The product $V_\textrm{rms}I_\textrm{rms}$ is known as the *apparent power* $S$. The factor $\cos(\theta_v - \theta_i)$ is called the *power factor* $\mathrm{pf}$.

> $\displaystyle P = \frac{1}{2} V_m I_m \cos(\theta_v - \theta_i) = V_\textrm{rms}I_\textrm{rms}\cos(\theta_v - \theta_i)$

> The ***apparent power*** (in $\textrm{VA}$) is the product of the [rms values](28b471d6.md) of voltage and current.
>
> $\boxed{S = V_\textrm{rms}I_\textrm{rms}}$

The *apparent power* is measured in volt-amperes or $\textrm{VA}$ to distinguish it from the [average (real) power](103c4ff6.md), which is measured in watts.

> The ***power factor*** is the cosine of the phase difference between voltage and current. It is also the cosine of the angle of the load impedance.
>
> $\boxed{\mathrm{pf} = \frac{P}{S} = \cos(\theta_v - \theta_i)}$

The *power factor* is dimensionless, since it is the ratio of the [average (real) power](103c4ff6.md) $P$ to the apparent power $S$. The angle $\theta_v - \theta_i$ is called the *power factor angle*, since it is the angle whose cosine is the *power factor*.

The *power factor angle* is equal to the angle of the load impedance if $\mathbf{V}$ is the voltage across the load and $\mathbf{I}$ is the current through it.

> $\displaystyle \mathbf{Z} = \frac{\mathbf{V}}{\mathbf{I}} = \frac{V_m\angle\theta_v}{I_m\angle\theta_i} = \frac{V_m}{I_m}\angle(\theta_v - \theta_i)$
>
> $\displaystyle \mathbf{Z} = \frac{\mathbf{V}_\textrm{rms}}{\mathbf{I}_\textrm{rms}} = \frac{V_\textrm{rms}\angle\theta_v}{I_\textrm{rms}\angle\theta_i} = \frac{V_\textrm{rms}}{I_\textrm{rms}}\angle(\theta_v - \theta_i)$

The value of power factor ($\mathrm{pf}$) ranges between zero and unity. For a purely resistive load, the voltage and current are in phase, so that $\theta_v - \theta_i = 0$ and $\mathrm{pf} = 1$. This implies that the apparent power $S$ is equal to the average power $P$. For a purely reactive load, $\theta_v - \theta_i = \pm 90^\circ$ and $\mathrm{pf} = 0$. In this case the average power is zero. In between these two extreme cases, $\mathrm{pf}$ is said to be *leading* or *lagging*. Leading power factor means that current leads voltage, which implies a capacitive load. Lagging power factor means that current lags voltage, implying an inductive load.
