---
date: 2023-10-05
tags:
  - signal
---

# Discrete Signal Measures

Signal measures for [discrete signals](03141daf.md) are often based on summations. Summation is the discrete-time equivalent of integration.

> For discrete signal $x[n]$ and integer index $n$,
>
> The ***discrete sum*** $S_D$,
>
> $\boxed{S_D = \sum_{n = -\infty}^{\infty} x[n]}$
>
> The ***absolute sum*** $S_A$,
>
> $\boxed{S_A = \sum_{n = -\infty}^{\infty} \left|x[n]\right|}$
>
> Signals for which the absolute sum $S_A$ is finite are called ***absolutely summable***.
>
> The ***cumulative sum*** $s_C$,
>
> $\boxed{s_{C}[n] = \sum_{k = -\infty}^{n} x[k]}$

For non-periodic signals, the ***signal energy*** $E$ is a useful measure. It is defined as the sum of the squares of the signal values.

> For integer index $n$,
>
> $\boxed{E = \sum_{n = -\infty}^{\infty} \left|x[n]\right|^2}$
>
> The absolute value $\left|x[n]\right|$ allows this relation to be used for [complex-valued](9efce189.md) signals.

Measures for [periodic signals](03141daf.md) are based on averages since their signal energy $E$ is infinite. The ***average value*** $x_{\textrm{av}}$ and ***signal power*** $P$ of a discrete periodic signal $x[n]$ with period $N$ are defined as the average sum per period and average energy per period, respectively.

> $\boxed{x_{\textrm{av}} = \frac{1}{N}\sum_{n = 0}^{N - 1} x[n]}\quad\textrm{(for discrete periodic signals)}$
>
> $\boxed{P = \frac{1}{N}\sum_{n = 0}^{N - 1} \left|x[n]\right|^2}\quad\textrm{(for discrete periodic signals)}$
>
> where period $N$ and index $n$ are [always integers](03141daf.md).

Signals with finite energy $(0 < E < \infty)$ are called ***energy signals*** (or square summable). Signals with finite power $(0 < P < \infty)$ are called ***power signals***.
