---
date: 2023-10-05
tags:
  - signal
---

# Signal Measures

The absolute area of signal provides useful measures of its size. A signal $x(t)$ is called ***absolutely integrable*** if it possesses finite absolute area:

> $\boxed{\int_{-\infty}^{\infty} \left|x(t)\right|\,dt < \infty}\quad\textrm{(for an absolutely integrable signal)}$

All [time-limited functions](09fc41c7.md) of finite amplitude have finite absolute area. The criterion of absolute integrability is often *used to check for system stability or justify the existence of certain transforms*.

## Signal Energy

The [instantaneous power](103c4ff6.md) $p_{i}(t)$ (in watts) delivered to a $1\,\Omega$ resistor may be expressed as $p_{i}(t) = x^{2}(t)$ where the signal $x(t)$ represents either the voltage across it or the current through it. The total energy $E$ delivered to the $1\,\Omega$ is called the ***signal energy*** (in joules) and is found by integrating the instantaneous power $p_{i}(t)$ for all time, this is also known as the [Parseval's theorem](840fbabf.md).

> $\boxed{E = \int_{-\infty}^{\infty} p_{i}(t)\,dt = \int_{-\infty}^{\infty} \left|x(t)\right|^2\,dt}$
>
> The absolute value $\left|x(t)\right|$ allows this relation to be used for [complex-valued](9efce189.md) signals.

Signals with finite energy $(0 < E < \infty)$ are called an ***energy signal*** or ***square integrable***. Energy signals have zero signal power $(P = 0)$ since finite energy is averaged over all (infinite) time. All [time-limited signals](09fc41c7.md) of finite amplitude are energy signals.

## Measures for Periodic Signals

[Periodic signals](09fc41c7.md) are characterized by several measures:

- The ***duty cycle*** (ratio) $D$ of periodic signal $x(t)$ equals the ratio of its pulse width $\mathrm{PW}$ and period $T$.

  > $\boxed{D = \frac{\mathrm{PW}}{T}}$

- The ***average value*** $x_{\textrm{av}}$ of periodic signal $x(t)$ equals the average area per period.

  > $\boxed{x_{\textrm{av}} = \frac{1}{T}\int_{T} x(t)\,dt}$
  >
  > where $T$ is the period.

- The ***signal power*** $P$ of periodic signal $x(t)$ equals the average energy per period.

  > $\boxed{P = \frac{1}{T}\int_{T} \left|x(t)\right|^2\,dt}$
  >
  > where $T$ is the period.

  Signals with finite power $(0 < P < \infty)$ and infinite energy $(E = \infty)$ are called ***power signals***. The periodic signals and their combinations are the examples of power signals.

- The [RMS value](28b471d6.md) $x_{\textrm{rms}}$ equals the square root of ***signal power*** $P$ of periodic signal $x(t)$.

  > $\boxed{x_{\textrm{rms}} = \sqrt{P} = \sqrt{\frac{1}{T}\int_{T} \left|x(t)\right|^2\,dt}}$
  >
  > where $T$ is the period.

The notation $\int_{T}$ is used to mean integration over any convenient one-period duration $T$.
