main/6f158a97.md, before:

---
date: 2023-09-06
tags:
  - circuit
  - frequency
---

# Transfer Functions

The ***transfer function*** $\mathbf{H}(\omega)$ (also called the *network function*) is a useful analytical tool for finding the [frequency response](56a77e5f.md) of a circuit. The frequency response of a circuit is the plot of the circuit's transfer function $\mathbf{H}(\omega)$ versus $\omega$, with $\omega$ varying from $\omega = 0$ to $\omega = \infty$.

A *transfer function* is the frequency-dependent ratio of a forced function to a forcing function (or of an output to an input). The transfer function of a network describes how the output behaves with respect to the input.

> The ***transfer function*** $\mathbf{H}(\omega)$ of a circuit is the frequency-dependent ratio of a [phasor](82b1dcbd.md) output $\mathbf{Y}(\omega)$ (an element voltage or current) to a phasor input $\mathbf{X}(\omega)$ (source voltage or current), assuming all initial conditions are zero.
>
> $\boxed{\mathbf{H}(\omega) = H(\omega)\angle\phi = \frac{\mathbf{Y}(\omega)}{\mathbf{X}(\omega)}}$
>
> where $H(\omega)$ is the magnitude, $\phi$ is the phase, and $\omega$ is the angular frequency.

Since the input and output can be either voltage $\mathbf{V}$ or current $\mathbf{I}$ at any place in the circuit, there are four possible transfer functions.

> $\boxed{\mathbf{H}(\omega) = \textrm{Voltage Gain} = \frac{\mathbf{V}_{o}(\omega)}{\mathbf{V}_{i}(\omega)}}$
>
> $\boxed{\mathbf{H}(\omega) = \textrm{Current Gain} = \frac{\mathbf{I}_{o}(\omega)}{\mathbf{I}_{i}(\omega)}}$
>
> $\boxed{\mathbf{H}(\omega) = \textrm{Transfer Impedance} = \frac{\mathbf{V}_{o}(\omega)}{\mathbf{I}_{i}(\omega)}}$
>
> $\boxed{\mathbf{H}(\omega) = \textrm{Transfer Admittance} = \frac{\mathbf{I}_{o}(\omega)}{\mathbf{V}_{i}(\omega)}}$
>
> where subscripts $i$ and $o$ denote input and output values, respectively.

To obtain the transfer function $\mathbf{H}(\omega)$, first obtain the frequency-domain equivalent of the circuit by replacing resistors, inductors, and capacitors with their [impedances](45a5fbef.md). Then use any circuit techniques to obtain the transfer function. The [frequency response](56a77e5f.md) of the circuit can be obtained by plotting the magnitude and phase of the transfer function as the frequency varies.

A transfer function $\mathbf{H}(\omega)$ can be expressed in terms of its numerator polynomial $\mathbf{N}(\omega)$ and denominator polynomial $\mathbf{D}(\omega)$.

> $\boxed{\mathbf{H}(\omega) = \frac{\mathbf{N}(\omega)}{\mathbf{D}(\omega)}}$
>
> where $\mathbf{N}(\omega)$ and $\mathbf{D}(\omega)$ are not necessarily the same expressions for the input and output functions, respectively.

The roots of $\mathbf{N}(\omega) = 0$ are called the *zeros* of $\mathbf{H}(\omega)$, and the roots of $\mathbf{D}(\omega) = 0$ are the *poles* of $\mathbf{H}(\omega)$.

> A ***zero***, as a *root* of numerator polynomial $\mathbf{N}(\omega)$, is a value for which the transfer function $\mathbf{H}(\omega)$ is zero. A ***pole***, as a *root* of denominator polynomial $\mathbf{D}(\omega)$, is a value for which the transfer function $\mathbf{H}(\omega)$ is infinite.

To avoid [complex algebra](1b0e3e96.md), it is expedient to replace $j\omega$ temporarily with $s$ when working with $\mathbf{H}(\omega)$ and replace $s$ with $j\omega$ at the end.

In general, a transfer function $\mathbf{H}(\omega)$ in the *s*-domain can be expressed in the form

> $\boxed{\mathbf{H}(s) = \frac{\mathbf{N}(s)}{\mathbf{D}(s)} = K\frac{(s - z_1)(s - z_2)\cdots(s - z_m)}{(s - p_1)(s - p_2)\cdots(s - p_n)}}$
>
> where $s = j\omega$ is the complex frequency, K is a constant, $z_1,\,z_2,\,\dots,\,z_m$ are the zeros of the transfer function, and $p_1,\,p_2,\,\dots,\,p_n$ are the poles of the transfer function.

Commit message:

deleted:    .github/workflows/update-flake-lock.yaml new file:   main/50d3bdaf.md modified:   main/53f31a4e.md modified:   main/5ab15bd7.md modified:   main/6f158a97.md new file:   main/c225601a.md new file:   main/cbcacf19.md new file:   main/d576ff9e.md new file:   main/media/second-order-critically-damped-step-response.svg new file:   main/media/second-order-overdamped-step-response.svg new file:   main/media/second-order-undamped-step-response.svg new file:   main/media/second-order-underdamped-step-response.svg new file:   main/media/transfer-function-pole-zero-plot.svg new file:   main/media/transient-response-specification.svg

main/6f158a97.md, after:

---
date: 2024-05-06
tags:
  - circuit
  - frequency
---

# Transfer Functions

The ***transfer function*** $\mathbf{H}(\omega)$ (also called the *network function*) is a useful analytical tool for finding the [frequency response](56a77e5f.md) of a circuit. The frequency response of a circuit is the plot of the circuit's transfer function $\mathbf{H}(\omega)$ versus $\omega$, with $\omega$ varying from $\omega = 0$ to $\omega = \infty$.

A *transfer function* is the frequency-dependent ratio of a forced function to a forcing function (or of an output to an input). The transfer function of a network describes how the output behaves with respect to the input.

> The ***transfer function*** $\mathbf{H}(\omega)$ of a circuit is the frequency-dependent ratio of a [phasor](82b1dcbd.md) output $\mathbf{Y}(\omega)$ (an element voltage or current) to a phasor input $\mathbf{X}(\omega)$ (source voltage or current), assuming all initial conditions are zero.
>
> $\boxed{\mathbf{H}(\omega) = H(\omega)\angle\phi = \frac{\mathbf{Y}(\omega)}{\mathbf{X}(\omega)}}$
>
> where $H(\omega)$ is the magnitude, $\phi$ is the phase, and $\omega$ is the angular frequency.

Since the input and output can be either voltage $\mathbf{V}$ or current $\mathbf{I}$ at any place in the circuit, there are four possible transfer functions.

> $\boxed{\mathbf{H}(\omega) = \textrm{Voltage Gain} = \frac{\mathbf{V}_{o}(\omega)}{\mathbf{V}_{i}(\omega)}}$
>
> $\boxed{\mathbf{H}(\omega) = \textrm{Current Gain} = \frac{\mathbf{I}_{o}(\omega)}{\mathbf{I}_{i}(\omega)}}$
>
> $\boxed{\mathbf{H}(\omega) = \textrm{Transfer Impedance} = \frac{\mathbf{V}_{o}(\omega)}{\mathbf{I}_{i}(\omega)}}$
>
> $\boxed{\mathbf{H}(\omega) = \textrm{Transfer Admittance} = \frac{\mathbf{I}_{o}(\omega)}{\mathbf{V}_{i}(\omega)}}$
>
> where subscripts $i$ and $o$ denote input and output values, respectively.

To obtain the transfer function $\mathbf{H}(\omega)$, first obtain the frequency-domain equivalent of the circuit by replacing resistors, inductors, and capacitors with their [impedances](45a5fbef.md). Then use any circuit techniques to obtain the transfer function. The [frequency response](56a77e5f.md) of the circuit can be obtained by plotting the magnitude and phase of the transfer function as the frequency varies.

A transfer function $\mathbf{H}(\omega)$ can be expressed in terms of its numerator polynomial $\mathbf{N}(\omega)$ and denominator polynomial $\mathbf{D}(\omega)$.

> $\boxed{\mathbf{H}(\omega) = \frac{\mathbf{N}(\omega)}{\mathbf{D}(\omega)}}$
>
> where $\mathbf{N}(\omega)$ and $\mathbf{D}(\omega)$ are not necessarily the same expressions for the input and output functions, respectively.

The roots of $\mathbf{N}(\omega) = 0$ are called the *zeros* of $\mathbf{H}(\omega)$, and the roots of $\mathbf{D}(\omega) = 0$ are the *poles* of $\mathbf{H}(\omega)$.

> A ***zero***, as a *root* of numerator polynomial $\mathbf{N}(\omega)$, is a value for which the transfer function $\mathbf{H}(\omega)$ is zero. A ***pole***, as a *root* of denominator polynomial $\mathbf{D}(\omega)$, is a value for which the transfer function $\mathbf{H}(\omega)$ is infinite.

To avoid [complex algebra](1b0e3e96.md), it is expedient to replace $j\omega$ temporarily with $s$ when working with $\mathbf{H}(\omega)$ and replace $s$ with $j\omega$ at the end.

In general, a transfer function $\mathbf{H}(\omega)$ in the *s*-domain can be expressed in the form

> $\boxed{\mathbf{H}(s) = \frac{\mathbf{N}(s)}{\mathbf{D}(s)} = K\frac{(s - z_1)(s - z_2)\cdots(s - z_m)}{(s - p_1)(s - p_2)\cdots(s - p_n)}}$
>
> where $(s = \sigma + j\omega)$ is the complex frequency, K is a constant, $z_1,\,z_2,\,\dots,\,z_m$ are the zeros of the transfer function, and $p_1,\,p_2,\,\dots,\,p_n$ are the poles of the transfer function.

> The complex frequency $s$***-plane*** plot of the poles and zeros graphically portrays the character of the natural [transient response](c225601a.md) of the [system](5ab15bd7.md).

![](./media/transfer-function-pole-zero-plot.svg)
