---
date: 2023-10-06
tags:
  - system
  - signal
---

# Discrete-Time Systems

Discrete-time systems modeled by difference equations relate the output $y[n]$ to the input $x[n]$. The general form of an $N$th-order difference equation may be written as

> $\boxed{y[n] + A_{1}\,y[n - 1] + \cdots + A_{N}\,y[n - N] = B_{0}\,x[n] + B_{1}\,x[n - 1] + \cdots + B_{M}\,x[n - M]}$
>
> The ***order*** $N$ describes the output term with the largest delay. It is customary to normalize the leading coefficient to unity.

Difference equations involve signals and their shifted versions, which can be conveniently expressed using *operator notation*.

> For integer values of $k$,
>
> $\boxed{z^{\,k}\{x[n]\} = x[n + k]}$
>
> where $z^{\,k}$ is ***shift operator***.

## Linear Time-Invariant Systems (LTI)

An LTI system is described by difference equations with constant coefficients.

> $\boxed{y[n] + A_{1}\,y[n - 1] + \cdots + A_{N}\,y[n - N] = B_{0}\,x[n] + B_{1}\,x[n - 1] + \cdots + B_{M}\,x[n - M]}$
>
> where coefficients $A$ and $B$ are constants, and all terms contain $x[n]$ or $y[n]$.

To test for linearity or time-invariance, the following can be applied:

- *Terms* containing products of the input and/or output make a system equation ***non-linear***. A *constant term* also makes a system equation non-linear.
- *Coefficients* of the input or output that are explicit functions of $n$ make a system equation ***time-variant*** (time varying). Time-scaled (w/o reflection) inputs or outputs also make a system equation time varying.

## Causality and Memory

In a ***causal system***, the present response $y[n]$ cannot depend on future values of the input $x[n]$. Systems whose present response $y[n]$ requires future inputs $x[n + K]$ $(K > 0)$ are termed ***non-causal***. Causality can be checked by examining the ***operational transfer function*** $H(z)$ derived from the difference equation in operator form.

> $\boxed{H(z) = \frac{B_{0}z^M + B_{1}z^{M - 1} + \cdots + B_{M - 1}z + B_M}{A_{0}z^N + A_{1}z^{N - 1} + \cdots + A_{N - 1}z + A_N} = \frac{P_{M}(z)}{Q_{N}(z)}}$
>
> If the order $M$ of the numerator polynomial $P_{M}(z)$ exceeds the order $N$ of the denominator polynomial $Q_{N}(z)$, the system is ***non-causal***.

### Instantaneous and Dynamic Systems

If the response $y[n]$ of a system at $n = n_0$ depends only on the input $x[n]$ at $n = n_0$ and not at any other times (past or future), the system is called ***instantaneous*** or ***static***. If the response $y[n]$ of a system depends on past (and/or future) inputs $x[n]$, the system is called ***dynamic***.

Dynamic systems are usually described by (but not limited to) difference equations.
