---
date: 2024-01-24
tags:
  - logic
---

# Forms of Boolean Algebra

## Canonical Form

[Boolean functions](3d005f51.md) expressed as a sum of minterms or product of maxterms are said to be in ***canonical form***.

> For a Boolean function of $n$ variables, a product term in which each of the $n$ variables appears once (either in its complemented or uncomplemented form) is called a ***minterm***. Thus, a minterm is a logical expression of $n$ variables that employs only the complement $(')$ operator and the **AND** $(\cdot)$ operator.

> For a Boolean function of $n$ variables, a sum term in which each of the $n$ variables appears once (either in its complemented or uncomplemented form) is called a ***maxterm***. Thus, a maxterm is a logical expression of $n$ variables that employs only the complement $(')$ operator and the **OR** $(+)$ operator.

For a Boolean function of $n$ variables, there are $2^n$ distinct minterms/maxterms, since a variable in the minterm/maxterm expression can be in either its complemented or its uncomplemented form.

> The maxterm with subscript $i$ is a [complement](3d005f51.md) of the minterm with the same subscript $i$ and vice versa.
>
> $\boxed{m_{i}^{\,\prime} = M_i}$
>
> $\boxed{M_{i}^{\,\prime} = m_i}$

For example, a truth table of functions $f_1$ and $f_2$ of $3$ variables $(x,\,y,\,z)$.

| $x$ | $y$ | $z$ | $f_1$ | $f_2$ | **Minterms** $m_i$ | **Maxterms** $M_i$ |
| :- | :- | :- | :- | :- | :- | :- |
| $0$ | $0$ | $0$ | $0$ | $0$ | $\displaystyle m_0 = x^{\,\prime} \cdot y^{\,\prime} \cdot z^{\,\prime}$ | $\displaystyle M_0 = x + y + z$ |
| $0$ | $0$ | $1$ | $1$ | $0$ | $\displaystyle m_1 = x^{\,\prime} \cdot y^{\,\prime} \cdot z$ | $\displaystyle M_1 = x + y + z^{\,\prime}$ |
| $0$ | $1$ | $0$ | $0$ | $0$ | $\displaystyle m_2 = x^{\,\prime} \cdot y \cdot z^{\,\prime}$ | $\displaystyle M_2 = x + y^{\,\prime} + z$ |
| $0$ | $1$ | $1$ | $0$ | $1$ | $\displaystyle m_3 = x^{\,\prime} \cdot y \cdot z$ | $\displaystyle M_3 = x + y^{\,\prime} + z^{\,\prime}$ |
| $1$ | $0$ | $0$ | $1$ | $0$ | $\displaystyle m_4 = x \cdot y^{\,\prime} \cdot z^{\,\prime}$ | $\displaystyle M_4 = x^{\,\prime} + y + z$ |
| $1$ | $0$ | $1$ | $0$ | $1$ | $\displaystyle m_5 = x \cdot y^{\,\prime} \cdot z$ | $\displaystyle M_5 = x^{\,\prime} + y + z^{\,\prime}$ |
| $1$ | $1$ | $0$ | $0$ | $1$ | $\displaystyle m_6 = x \cdot y \cdot z^{\,\prime}$ | $\displaystyle M_6 = x^{\,\prime} + y^{\,\prime} + z$ |
| $1$ | $1$ | $1$ | $1$ | $1$ | $\displaystyle m_7 = x \cdot y \cdot z$ | $\displaystyle M_7 = x^{\,\prime} + y^{\,\prime} + z^{\,\prime}$ |

### Sum of Minterms

A Boolean function can be expressed algebraically from a given truth table by forming a minterm for each combination of the variables that produces a $1$ in the function and then taking the **OR** $(+)$ of all those minterms.

> Expressing the truth table of function $f_1$ as a sum of minterms,
>
> $\displaystyle f_1 = \Sigma(1,\,4,\,7) = m_1 + m_4 + m_7$
>
> $\displaystyle f_1 = x^{\,\prime} \cdot y^{\,\prime} \cdot z + x \cdot y^{\,\prime} \cdot z^{\,\prime} + x \cdot y \cdot z$
>
> Expressing the truth table of function $f_2$ as a sum of minterms,
>
> $\displaystyle f_2 = \Sigma(3,\,5,\,6,\,7) = m_3 + m_5 + m_6 + m_7$
>
> $\displaystyle f_2 = x^{\,\prime} \cdot y \cdot z + x \cdot y^{\,\prime} \cdot z + x \cdot y \cdot z^{\,\prime} + x \cdot y \cdot z$
>
> The summation symbol $\Sigma$ stands for the **OR**-ing $(+)$ of minterms; the numbers are the indices of the minterms of the function.

To express a Boolean function as a sum of minterms, it must first be brought into a form of **AND** terms. This may be done by using the [distributive law](3d005f51.md). Then any missing variable $x$ in each **AND** term is **AND**-ed $(+)$ with $x + x^{\,\prime}$. Similar minterms can be combined by using the [idempotence](3d005f51.md) theorem.

### Product of Maxterms

A Boolean function can be expressed algebraically from a given truth table by forming a maxterm for each combination of the variables that produces a $0$ in the function and then taking the **AND** $(\cdot)$ of all those maxterms.

> Expressing the truth table of function $f_1$ as a sum of maxterms,
>
> $\displaystyle f_1 = \Pi(0,\,2,\,3,\,5,\,6) = M_0 \cdot M_2 \cdot M_3 \cdot M_5 \cdot M_6$
>
> $\displaystyle f_1 = \left(x + y + z\right)\cdot\left(x + y^{\,\prime} + z\right)\cdot\left(x + y^{\,\prime} + z^{\,\prime}\right)\cdot\left(x^{\,\prime} + y + z^{\,\prime}\right)\cdot\left(x^{\,\prime} + y^{\,\prime} + z\right)$
>
> Expressing the truth table of function $f_2$ as a sum of maxterms,
>
> $\displaystyle f_2 = \Pi(0,\,1,\,2,\,4) = M_0 \cdot M_1 \cdot M_2 \cdot M_4$
>
> $\displaystyle f_2 = \left(x + y + z\right)\cdot\left(x + y + z^{\,\prime}\right)\cdot\left(x + y^{\,\prime} + z\right)\cdot\left(x^{\,\prime} + y + z\right)$
>
> The product symbol $\Pi$ stands for the **AND**-ing $(\cdot)$ of maxterms; the numbers are the indices of the maxterms of the function.

To express a Boolean function as a product of maxterms, it must first be brought into a form of **OR** terms. This may be done by using the [distributive law](3d005f51.md). Then any missing variable $x$ in each **OR** term is **OR**-ed $(+)$ with $x \cdot x^{\,\prime}$. Similar maxterms can be combined by using the [idempotence](3d005f51.md) theorem.

### Conversion between Canonical Forms

The complement of a function expressed as the sum of minterms equals the sum of minterms missing from the original function. And, the complement of a function expressed as the product of maxterms equals the product of maxterms missing from the original function.

> For example, consider the function $\displaystyle F(A,\,B,\,C) = \Sigma(1,\,4,\,5,\,6,\,7)$
>
> Since there are $3$ variables in a function $F$, the function $F$ has $2^3 = 8$ distinct minterms/maxterms.
>
> Therefore, the function has a complement that can be expressed as
>
> $\displaystyle F^{\prime}(A,\,B,\,C) = \Sigma(0,\,2,\,3) = m_0 + m_2 + m_3$
>
> Taking the complement of $F^{\prime}$ by [De Morgan's theorem](3d005f51.md), the function $F$ is obtained in a different form
>
> $\displaystyle F(A,\,B,\,C) = (m_0 + m_2 + m_3)^{\prime} = m_{0}^{\,\prime} \cdot m_{2}^{\,\prime} \cdot m_{3}^{\,\prime} = M_0 \cdot M_2 \cdot M_3 = \Pi(0,\,2,\,3)$

> In general, to convert from one canonical form to another, interchange the symbols $\Sigma$ and $\Pi$ and list those numbers missing from the original form.

In order to find the missing terms, one must realize that the total number of minterms/maxterms is $2^n$, where $n$ is the number of binary variables in the function.

## Standard Form

Another way to express Boolean functions is in ***standard form***. In this configuration, the terms that form the function may contain one, two, or any number of literals. There are two types of standard forms: the sum of products and product of sums.

> The ***sum of products*** is a Boolean expression containing **AND** terms, called ***product terms***, with one or more literals each. The ***sum*** denotes the **OR**-ing $(+)$ of these terms.
>
> For example, $\displaystyle F_1 = y^{\,\prime} + x \cdot y + x^{\,\prime} \cdot y \cdot z^{\,\prime}$

> The ***product of sums*** is a Boolean expression containing **OR** terms, called ***sum terms***. Each term may have any number of literals. The ***product*** denotes the **AND**-ing $(\cdot)$ of these terms.
>
> For example, $\displaystyle F_2 = x \cdot \left(y^{\,\prime} + z\right) \cdot \left(x^{\,\prime} + y + z^{\,\prime}\right)$

The gate structure of the *sum-of-products* expression consists of a group of **AND** gates for the product terms followed by a single **OR** gate. And, the gate structure of the *product-of-sums* expression consists of a group of **OR** gates for the sum terms followed by a single **AND** gate.

> This standard type of expression results in a two-level structure of [gates](afcc79cf.md).

In general, a two-level implementation is preferred because it produces the least amount of [delay](6f989aae.md) through the gates when the signal propagates from the inputs to the output. However, the number of inputs to a given gate might not be practical.
